---
title: "Competitive Dynamics"
---

Some VCs worry a lot about market defensibility when considering an investment. In looking at Company X, they want to know to what extent Company X will be able to defend the profitability and market share that it will, hopefully, attain in the future. Can Airbnb defend its two sided marketplace for short term lessors/lessees? Can Uber avoid being undercut by competitors who are willing to be less profitable or to restrict themselves to dominating local markets? Are the switching costs so high that consumers won't move from Dropbox to another file sharing company? Etc.

In the context of early-stage venture investing, I doubt this worry is worthwile. Investing in companies that have defensible market positions makes sense as a goal, but it probably isn't a practical concern for early-stage deals because of the difficulty in prediction. I'm not saying that defensibility isn't important; it obviously is. But predicting Company X's defensibility at the A or B round is so hard that it's likely pointless to try. It matters, but you can't predict it.

Part of the bias here probably comes from hindsight since, again, successful companies (monopolists) almost by definition attain strong defensibility eventually, making it tempting to look backwards in time and think that the path to defensibility was predictable. Every corporate strategy textbook in 2016 looks backwards at Google's timeline and sees defensibility; no textbook in 1998 would look forward and see it. (Recall a time when AltaVista, AskJeeves,
Yahoo Search, Lycos, and MSN Search had significant market share, and everyone was trying to improve pagerank and natural language search.) Or, more relevantly today: What defensibility does a limo / black car hailing app have, when the technology is simple and there are other players in the market already? Seven years and one "two sided marketplace" later, everyone sees defensibility in the past. A week after [Square's Khosla-led $10m@$35m-pre Series
A](https://techcrunch.com/2009/12/01/square-worth-40-million-before-launch/), Verizon acquired [Payware Mobile](https://techcrunch.com/2009/12/10/verifone-rushes-to-announce-square-competitor-jack-dorsey-comments/) and spectators were quick to comment that mobile credit card processing would be immediately commoditized by larger players. When Square went public last November, Khosla's stake was worth $450m.

My point is not that startup success is random, or that investors at the A or B stage are guessing; my point is that that there are lots of good signals at this stage (growth & traction, founding team ability, existing market compeition,...) but that market defensibility is not one of them. Companies pivot, markets change, and execution matters more than many investors think. Again, this is early-stage specific; defensibility is a concern, and should absolutely be part of diligence, for private equity.

To the die-hard fans of market defensibility in early-stage investing, I'd pose the following long-term bet: At the next YC demo day, give each company a 1 to 5 rating on market defensibility. I bet that five years later, these ratings have zero correlation with enterprise value. (But if you did a similar, Kahneman-esque rating for founding-team ability, I'd bet the correlation is there.)
