---
title: Betting with Data in Prediction Markets
---

# Spread Bets

Let's look at the share-of-vote predictions for Maryland

<!-- Image -->

Just eyeballing this chart, I estimate Hillary to be normally distributed as follows: N(63.2, 2.5). Maybe Bernie is about N(33.9, 2.5). The nice thing about the democratic market is that there are only two candidates: If Hillary is up 5% from projections, then Bernie is probably down close to 5%. So I felt "relatively safe" in replacing Bernie with a point estimate of 41.3. That means: **Hillary - Bernie is (my guess) N(29.3, 2.5) distributed, maybe N(29.3, 3) to be safe.**

Now let's look at the prediction market:

<!-- Image -->

I can buy in at an 85% chance that Hillary - Bernie > 20%. That is, I pay $0.85 for a "Yes" share, and I get paid $1.00 if Hillary - Bernie > 20% and $0 otherwise.

So what is the chance that N(29.3, 3) > 20%? **It's way more than 85%.** 20% is 3.1 standard deviations away from 29.3, meaning that there's more than a 99.9% chance that Hillary - Bernie > 20%.

So we have a good opportunity here: We can buy risk for less than it's worth. The only question now is: How much should I bet? The [Kelly Criterion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kelly_criterion) tells us. If you work it out in the case of a binary prediction market, the Kelly Criterion says we should bet (true probability - market probability)/(1 - market probability) of our bankroll. In this case: (0.999 - 0.85)/(0.15) = 99.3%.

That's too rich for me, so I use a fractional Kelly bet: I only want to risk 50% of my cash, so I'm going to bet 50% x 99.3% = 49%. Let's just make it an even 50%. In this case, I'm playing with a $200 bankroll, so I bet $100 on this outcome.


